I just got back from #ASMicrobe, where I had a great meeting. I took a workshop on an R package I wanted to learn, caught with old friends, made new ones, attended great talks, learned from vendors about their latest and greatest, and, hopefully, passed on something of value to someone else.

In one of the discussions I had over dinner, a friend I made last year, @iprophage, told me about his first #ASMicrobe. He was a postdoc, and no one else from his lab attended. He saw other people enjoying themselves and having a great meeting, but he was miserable. He never wanted to come back.

Thankfully, he was convinced to return, this time with a PhD student from the lab. After the Opening Session, he and I and about 10 other folks met for dinner and drinks in the French Quarter, as is a @markomartin tradition. We all had a great time, and followed each other on twitter. @iprophage and his lab mate and I then ran into one another time and again – attending the same sessions several times, bumping into each other in the posters or on the vendor floor, having a coffee before the morning sessions. I introduced him to my friends, and he introduced me to his, expanding our circles of microbiologists we’d look forward seeing in the future.

Getting back to our dinner this year at #ASMicrobe, we thought about those who are coming for the first time. Or are coming alone and don’t have a lab to hang out with. Or are introverts and aren’t comfortable introducing themselves to strangers. Or have changed fields recently. Or their imposter syndrome is kicking in super hard. There are any number of reasons someone might feel lonely in a sea of people who all seem to have it together and all seem to know each other. What could we do to help remedy this situation?


STEP ONE – IDENTIFY THE SINGLETONS

When you register for #ASMicrobe, you can check a box that you would like to be binned with other singletons. There will be some further data collection to attempt to bin people together from similar tracks.

STEP TWO – BIN THE SINGLETONS

Using the data provided by the singletons, #ASMicrobe will bin 2-4 singletons together with a mentor. The mentor will be a local chapter officer, or a journal editor, or a super active community member. In any case, this person will have checked a box at registration that they would like to be a mentor to a bin of singletons.  The mentors and singletons meet up at or right before the Opening Session. They attend together, and afterwards attend the Opening Reception, or, perhaps, the mentor takes them to meet up for dinner and drinks with their usual group at, say, a tiki bar.

STEP THREE – HOW TO MEETING

The first full day of the conference, the binned singletons and mentor stick together. Since they’ve been binned by track, they will likely find many of the same sessions interesting, and they will learn the value of sessions that didn’t interest them on paper but are fascinating once you’re in the room. The mentor will take them through the posters. All along the way, there will be interactions with the many people the mentor already knows, and their students/post-docs/collaborators, expanding the pool of resources for the singletons. The mentor can discuss the value of speaking with vendors, and when to find time in one’s schedule to work that in. While this all sounds very prescriptive, it doesn’t have to be restrictive. Singletons need not necessarily follow the mentor around everywhere, but waypoints should be set up for meeting up later if people want to attend different sessions/posters/fireside chats/career talks.

STEP FOUR – QUORUM SENSING

The evening of the first day, #ASMicrobe has a mixer for all the mentors and the singletons. By now they’ve spent over a day together. Mentors can help match singletons up with other scientists they should meet. The singletons will also self-sort, possibly with a little help in the way of buttons that display one’s interests in terms of field, skillset, and career (for example, I might have 3 pins: #MicrobialEcology, #MolecularBiology, #Government). This way the singletons could find their way to their proper OTU.

STEP FIVE – CRUSH THE MEETING LIKE A PRO

On day two, the singletons have come a long way. They know their way around the building. They know their way around the vendors. They’ve met a lot of people, some of whom they were intimidated by and turned out to be pretty nice. They have a pre-made bid of people they can stick with, or they can run with their newly self-sorted bins, because they now have a large cohort from the mixer the night before. They have people to get lunch with, to say hello to in passing, and the confidence to stop someone that they really admire and ask a question. Now they know how to meeting.


Of course, smart people have come up with similar ideas in the past. #ASMicrobe has its own Microbe Academy for Professional Development for students which covers much of what my plan aims to accomplish. I've not attended (because I'm an #olds), but it sounds fantastic, but is not open to post-docs, industry, or others who might be singletons for other reasons. It also  has additional monetary and time requirements that not every attendee who seeks a quorum can afford. Another example is the Goldschmidt meeting. It has an excellent mentoring program, with a nice framework and clear objectives (https://goldschmidt.info/2018/mentoring), which some ASM members have participated in and have had good experiences.

